Hello everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host as always Ricard Lob and
to the MG by Doctor Oliver Oliver Tralee. He
is a John and D Bery postdoctoral research fellow
at the James Medicine program at Princeton in University.
He studies epistemology with the focus on the epistemology
of politics. And today we're talking about his book,
Political Beliefs, uh Philosophical Introduction. So Oliver, welcome to
the show. It's a pleasure to everyone.
Thank you. It's a pleasure to be here. Thank
you so much for having me.
So tell us first, perhaps what is political epistemology
and how did you get interested in that specific?
Uh I mean, sub discipline of epistemology, I guess.
Yeah. So um the, the second question is easier
than the first one A as I was applying
to, to phd programs. Uh IN 2017, it basically
was in the early days of the, the Trump
era, right, of the early days of the Trump
presidency and a lot of a lot of public
discussion, not discussion in academia but public discussion um
about the Trump presidency uh and the Trump campaign.
Uh AND American politics around then was about epistemology
in a sense, right? So you had terms like
fake news, alternative facts being thrown, thrown around. You
had these discussions of um you know, information bubbles,
information cascades. Um And you had other words, which
to me felt a little epistemological even though nobody
else had, had given an account of them uh
in terms like normalization, um you had talked conspiracy
theories, things like that. So political epistemology was very
much in the air um in the early days
and it, and it kind of related back to
some things I'd studied as an undergraduate as an
undergraduate. I was a classics major with an interest
in politics. I ended up going to law school
for a year after that and I worked on
a political campaign in 2008 and things like that.
Um And I had studied polarization in college. Uh
And I was familiar with CASS Sunstein account of
uh belief polarization and going to extremes and uh
his account of the way the internet related to
that by, by putting people in these bubbles. There
was a great article by Ty Gin um in
a eon called a, a public article about uh
well, what he calls uh epistemic bubbles and echo
chambers. Um THAT also there was also an academic
article in epistemic um on the same topic that
he wrote. Uh So I was basically seeing all
this stuff um about the Trump presidency, but also
I was having my own doubts about, you know,
having been sort of a political progress in my
whole life. I started having these questions about, you
know, why do I have so little contact um,
with this whole other group of people, uh, who,
who are voting in ways that, you know, nobody,
nobody who I'm around ever understands. Um, WHERE do
their beliefs come from? Are their beliefs based on
reasons, um, and talking to them improve my own
beliefs. Uh This was also, uh you know, it's
funny that these things happened at the same time,
but the term campaign was happening around the same
time as a lot of the uh the Open
Science movement um and Heterodox Academy and efforts like
that, that were about, on the one hand, um
you know, eee even things like statistical practices or
peer review in the Science sciences preprints, um avoiding
p hacking, avoiding um fraud and science. Um But
on the other hand about the, you know, the
political skew of the Academy, um and where, where
our supposedly expert beliefs come from, uh and things
like that. So it was basically a moment where
there was all this talk of political epistemology and
I wasn't sure that it was being directed in,
in the right way. Uh It felt to me
like, maybe, maybe there was this sort of expert
community that was actually the one that should be,
you know, where, where we should be putting a
lot of uh critical attention. Um So, OK, that's
sort of my personal story. Your question, what is
political epistemology? Um Well, so we can, we can
start with, you know, traditional epistemology. We're, we're just
thinking about, you know, how can we justify our
beliefs, how can we possibly have knowledge? Um What
do you know, what sources of evidence do we
have? Um And are they good sources of evidence,
things like, uh you know, mathematical intuition or, or
perception? Um Those are the sorts of things that
Descartes, for instance, might have been interested in um
uh deductive versus inductive reasoning, you know, human skepticism
about causation, things like that. Then social epistemology is
concerned about a subset of those sources, the ones
where the information comes from other people. Um So
questions about how can we tell when somebody is
an expert, what should we do when somebody disagrees
with us? Um You know, what justifies you, you
know, I was in Europe a couple of months
ago, which I don't travel that much. Um And
uh so it was a big deal for me.
Uh You're on the street. I mean, among other
things, I didn't realize everybody speaks English. So I
can just go up to somebody and ask them
in English even if it's, you know, you know,
in Europe uh in a non English speaking country.
So I go up and ask, you know, where's
the museum? You know, where's the the modern art
museum in this town. Um And they give me
an answer, why do I trust that answer? What,
like what licenses me in trusting that answer. Um
So the nature of trust, the nature of other
people's testimony. Uh So that's a source of my
belief about where the museum is. That's a social
source. So that then we get to social epistemology,
then political epistemology um sort of means a few
different things at once. Uh One of them is
just uh the epistemology of political beliefs and how
we answer political questions and come to our beliefs
about political questions. Um BUT that's very broad, right?
So like, for example, um if I've proven uh
that, you know, one policy will result in, you
know, a low number, yy, you know, say five
injuries at my workplace and another policy will result
in 5000 injuries that were at my workplace. Um
Obviously, I need to do a little math to
know that 5000 is greater than five. But math,
you know, mathematical epistemology is not generally thought of
as we just take that sort of stuff for
granted once we're in the political realm, right? So
the most characteristic part of political epistemology is the
part that's sort of still social. Um So questions
about political disagreement, what, what do we do when
we disagree with others about politics? Um Questions about,
should we trust people in our political party more
than people in another political party. Are there experts
in politics? Um So some of these, some of
these questions come from the nature of politics that's
involving groups, right? So that there are different groups
in politics. And there's questions about OK, social epistemology.
I'm thinking about how does my epistemology change based
on the awareness that there are multiple people and
political epistemology in one sense is how did my,
how does my epistemology change based on the awareness
that there are multiple groups? Uh But an another
aspect of political epistemology is just that there are
these phenomena that happened in politics. Um And we
want to investigate kind of all the possible epistemological
contours of them uh phenomena that could be types
of beliefs or types of causes of beliefs. Um
So, for example, belief polarization uh seems to be
something that causes our beliefs to get into sets,
you know, sort of party platforms and also seems
to be something that pushes maybe people's beliefs away
from each other. Um uh So it's what I
call in the book sorting and extremism. On the
other hand, the cons conspiracy theories seem to be
types of beliefs. Um And so we can ask,
is there anything general we can say about this
type of belief? Um But though they both fall
under political epistemology because they're, they're both related in
some way to po politics. So it's, you know,
it's not a well defined term. Um But it
you know, it refers to the, the broad fact
that, that there's a lot of interesting stuff going
on here that a lot of people want to
study basically. Um And, you know, just one other
thing to say is that there's, there's a, you
know, there's this other tradition of political epistemology um
in Marxist thought, um and radical thought which has
to do with the notion of ideology. Um And
uh there's sort of questions about that because, you
know, it's not clear that if you're a Marxist
materialist, that you should think that the epistemology matters
that much, you should probably just think that like
the class relations and the material relations are, are
um what, what causes everything. So there's questions about
kind of the, the structure of the theory there.
Um But so there's, you know, so yeah, there's
a history of political epistemology and a lot of
different political and philosophical traditions.
But what actually counts as political because people might
say that they have, for example, a political disagreement
that they're having a political debate that when they're
discussing a particular subject, they're talking politics there. And
there are people that even claim and we can
get a little bit more into that, that everything
is actually political. So, but, but what does really
count as something political? This is
a question um This is the question that I
start my book with and I, I've, I've talked
about this with a lot of people and I
haven't, I haven't been super satisfied by any of
the answers. There are some things that seem obviously
political. You know, if, if I, you know, if
you go to Washington DC and you see people
yelling at each other about what the tax rate
should be and then people maneuver and there's sort
of like, you know, some compromise or they're trading
favors. If you vote on this bill this way,
then I'll vote on that bill that way. Um
Or if they, or if they go to war
or try to win an election against each other
or try to get a judge appointed or something
like that, these things seem obviously political. Um So
there are questions about what makes these things, um,
political, one aspect is that there seems to be
some kind of struggle in a lot of them,
right? Um So there's some sort of dispute uh
at the beginning and resolving that dispute or kind
of, you know, failing to resolve that dispute. Um
WHETHER you resolve it or not, uh That seems
to be part of the politics of what's going
on. Another aspect is that sort of the dispute
is resolved by the goal of the dispute is
to sort of, that's something up in society in
a certain way, right? Um Whether it's the tax
rate or the, you know, a question of whether
we'll go to war or not. So these are
what I call conflict and order in the book.
So uh you start with conflict, you wanna set
something in order. Um And uh then, then there's
another notion which I've never been quite as clear
on, um which is the notion of power. Uh
So a lot of people say, and this has
to be included just because, you know, this is
a book that's academic facing, but also public facing.
And in public, a lot of people will just
say the phrase politics is about power. Um So
I don't really know what any of the words
in that sentence mean. Um You know, we're trying
to define politics, trying to define power. The word
about is like one of these insanely vague words
that can mean completely different things in different contexts.
Um uh But it seems like here, the power
has to do with the, the setting in order.
So it's about the power to determine how things
will go. Um And uh it does seem like
even if you're not setting something specific in order,
if you're trying to gain power for some future
goal of setting things in order to resolve a
conflict or to win in a conflict, then then
you're doing politics as well. Um The, unfortunately, it
just seems that there's also, you know, we can
come up with counter examples to, to all of
these, you know, power conflict in order. There's, there's
counterexamples where OK, you're using power, but it's not
political power, there's a conflict, but it's not a
political conflict. You made some arrangement, but it's not
a political arrangement and you can even have all
three at the same time. So it doesn't seem
necessarily the case that there, there seems to be
maybe some background notion of political um where we,
we have an idea of what is a political
conflict and a non-political conflict. We have an idea
of what is political power and non-political power. We
have an idea of what is a political arrangement
and the non-political arrangement. Um So that's, you know,
that whatever that background idea is, um that, that's
sort of what we want to figure out and
I don't think I made any progress on figuring
that out. Um I hope somebody else does um
regarding this question of whether everything is political, um
you know, the first thing to say, which I
don't think I, I even mentioned in the book,
but one of the first things you see when
people talk about this online is basically like, you
know, any word that actually applies to everything, you
know, ceases to be meaningful, right? Um You know,
if, if you think extensionally about definitions, right? A
definition is meant to pick some things out and
exclude other things. That's how you communicate information, right?
Um So if somebody says, well, I'm gonna get
a little political here, you have like a rough
idea of the sorts of topics they might discuss.
Right. They're probably not going to talk about the
weather unless they're talking about climate change. Right. Um,
THEY might not talk about television unless they're talking
about the political content of some show or if
they're talking about, you know, what is the government
body that regulates what's on television or something like
that? That would be political. Um, BUT saying what
happened on the soap opera yesterday, that doesn't seem
political. Right. Um So basically, first of all, it
seems like the word political has to, it has
some information in it and if everything is political,
then I can't really have any information. Um But
people also, you know, people give arguments uh to
the effect that everything is political. Um And I
also, you know, I just in general think that
they're not very good arguments. Um One of the
arguments that I sort of make fun of the
most is that, you know, everything has some, you
know, everything that that exists now is the way
that it is because of the past, right? Because
of history and that history involves political history, right?
Um uh But at the same time, you know,
the history also involves a lot of other things
and generally we don't say like, you know, um
that, that, that something's history makes it what it
is, right? Um If, uh you know, I'm sitting
in a certain kind of chair, maybe the person
got inspired to make this chair because uh he
saw a sculpture, but that doesn't make the chair
a sculpture, right? That's just sort of like a,
a random fact about the history of the chair,
right? So you have these random facts about the
histories of objects and situations and people um that
can involve political facts, but that doesn't, you know,
this is just not the way that we use
words, right? Um So I've been, I've always been
very confused by the notion that everything is political.
Um I have some suspicions about what people's motivations
are in saying that. Um, BUT one way in
which I do think it's important to have a
somewhat expanded concept of the political uh is, you
know, just comes from the sorts of things I
argue about and in, in my public work and,
and with a lot of other people. Um So
I don't wanna say that the political is just
like passing laws going to war, things like that,
right? Um Because there are these chains of reasoning
that justify or at least when it comes to
political belief, right? There are these changes of reasoning
that justify those actions going to war, passing a
law. Um And it seems like our disputes about
items of those changes of reasoning can themselves be
political and the the beliefs we have that go
into those change of reasoning can, can themselves be
political. So if I believe, you know, somebody says
we should go to war because uh this, this
dictator is oppressing his own people. Um uh So,
well, my, you know, my belief about whether the
dictator is oppressing his own people, that seems like
a political belief um in part because it affects
political decision about whether or not to go to
war. Right? So in the book, I think of
political beliefs as being the things that affect political
decisions, the things that, that can, that are involved
in public disputes that, that, that relate to political
actions. Um Now you ask, what is a political
action? I'm gonna table that, right? I'll let somebody
else figure that out.
OK. So, but, but since we're talking here about
political beliefs, what are political beliefs really about? I
mean, there's a proposal that some people have that
what they, they are really about what we ought
to do and if that's the case, then they
are mostly moral beliefs. Uh What do you think
about that? And if you disagree, uh I mean,
what's your take on what the political belief is?
Yeah.
So, yeah, so like what I, like I was
saying, I think political beliefs um are belief that
are involved in these chains of reasoning. At least
the theory I give in the book, I'm sure
somebody will prove it wrong. But the theory that
I give in the book is political beliefs. Well,
there's two types I mentioned before how politics, a
lot of politics is about being in groups, right?
So one type of political belief is a belief
that sort of says I'm in this group, you're
in that group. Um And one issue in American
politics, at least is that we seem to have
a lot of beliefs like this right now. Um
This is what Robert Tali calls political saturation. Um
So non Americans are often surprised when I explain
this. But um so like Republicans tend to drink
coffee from one coffee company, and Democrats tend to
drink coffee from another coffee company. So you might
say our beliefs about which coffee is better or
political beliefs because they, they sort of, you know,
they, they separate one group for another. Um I
don't know, I don't know. That's, again, that's something,
you know, I'll, I'll let other people decide. I,
I more want to bridge the issue on that
kind of topic. The other kind, which is maybe
a little bit more central. Uh IS that when
we have chains of reasoning about what to do
in politics, what political actions to take? It seems
to me that whenever items in those chains are
in dispute or in conflict, um our beliefs about
them are political. Um So of course, it's a
poli a political belief whether or not we should
raise the tax rate. Um But I, you know,
one item in that chain of belief might be
uh does raising the tax rate. I disincentivize people
from starting businesses for example, right? Some economists might
think, yes, some economists might think. No, that's an,
that's a question in economics, but my belief about
it, I'm calling a political belief because the dispute
about it could be a dispute that, you know,
the resolution of which would resolve the question about
the political action if that makes sense. Um So
basically, whenever anything in one of these kind of
publicly controversial change of reasoning is in dispute, I'm
gonna call it a political dispute and I'm gonna
call the beliefs people have about it, political beliefs,
that's my approach at the moment must be I
end up with in the book,
right? But when there's a political disagreement or political
disputes, where does the disagreement stem from? Is it
uh because people disagree over facts or values because
they just use words differently because they struggle over
particular kinds of issues like finite resources or something
like that? I mean, and is it usually just
one single issue? I mean, would there be a,
an overarching theory of political conflict here or not?
Yeah. So I'm a, unfortunately, I'm sort of boring
about this issue. Um I call, I call myself
boring whenever I don't have like a big theory
and I say there's like different types, you know,
so there are people who have big theories about
this. So, um in particular, you have these political
realists, some of whom seem to say, well, there's
all, all the apparent disagreement is kind of like
papering over the, like, hobby and struggle for, for
resources. Right? Just I want something you want the
same thing. Maybe we come up with these pretend
reasons why I should get it and you should
not get it. But those are all the basic
fact is that we want the same thing. Right?
And, and the reasons are just us trying to
justify and us trying to, to rationalize getting what
we want. That's not what I believe. Um I
believe the these four sources of conflict you talk
about are all present in politics. Um And I
think it's really important not to. Um THERE'S an
old blog post by a blogger called Scott Alexander
where he talks about, he gives sort of like
a sim a simpler and like a little bit
less clear um version of this question of where
does political conflict come from. Um And yeah, so
he calls one type of theory, mistake theory and
another type of theory, conflict theory um where the
mistake theory is. Yeah, but there's political disagreements because,
you know, and political conflict because some people make
mistakes, right? Just like you might, if you're, you
know, if you're doing the math, you come up
with the wrong answer. So we have different answers
and then other people think, oh yeah, we're, we're,
we have different values or we're arguing over resources.
Um Well, I just think sometimes each of those
things can happen you know, it's just a complicated
world, different sorts of things happen at different times.
Um So I don't, I, I don't, I'm not
really, I'm not motivated to say any of these
things as sort of like the central or univocal
cause, um, or unique cause I guess is the
right word of a political conflict. I certainly think
that, you know, drilling down one thing I talk
about when, when I talk with, uh, you know,
state college students about, I how to argue with
people about politics and how to make those conversations
productive. Um, IS sort of like, yeah, you wanna
drill down and get at what is the root
of the, the conflict, right? What is really driving
this conflict? Um And sometimes it can be different
values, right? Like, you know, why does one person
support gun rights and the other one doesn't, well,
maybe the first person just thinks self reliance is
just so important. People should be able to be
self reliant even if, even if there's a, it
raises the chance that they accidentally shoot themselves, right?
It's the price we pay, right. Safety is not
as important as self reliance. Other people say no
safety, safety is like one of my most important
values. I don't want people to be injuring themselves
with guns. Right. So that seems like, um, you
know, and that's a pretty tame way maybe of
putting that disagreement, but it seems that we can
have those disagreements where there are these principles or
values and people just weigh them differently. Um, AND,
uh, you know, some of the psychological theories of
political beliefs seem to be about that seem to
be about how do we, how do we weigh
these values? And are there different types of people
who weigh values in different ways? Um, ON the
other hand, you know, some people could also just
say like, well, I looked at the statistics uh
and there just are so many, you know, self
inflicted injuries from guns that even if you only
weigh safety a little bit, you should be against
them or you might say, well, actually there are
basically none. So even if you weigh safety a
lot, you shouldn't, it shouldn't worry you that much,
right? So the empirical question of like how many
injuries actually are there, um if say different people
are studying this issue with different methodologies or if
the data is unclear or fuzzy or something like
that, um which is the case in studying so
many political issues. Um It's just very hard to
get the the the right answers. And um you
know, especially for somebody like me with a kind
of broad skepticism about uh kind of like the
current knowledge production, uh industry and expertise then yeah,
you can have a disagreement which is over empirical
facts and that can generate a political disagreement, right?
And then you can have, you know, you can
have these verbal disagreements. Uh, WELL, you know, sometimes
you think you're disagreeing with somebody and it just
turns out, you know, uh, you know, if somebody
says Trump is a fascist and I say, I
don't think Trump is a fascist and they think,
oh, this guy loves Trump. Um, AND, uh, then
we start arguing and then it comes out of
the argument. That's just like, oh, no, we just
think about fascism, you know, like I'm just using
this term, you know, in a slightly different way
than you are. And, you know, we're, we're both
on the same side of the politics of it.
Um So we're really disagreeing about the word fascism
rather than about Trump or about politics. Now, it
could still be that, you know, whether a verbal
dispute, verbal disputes can still be important in various
ways. Um But I feel like it's important to
know when, when, when that's what you're arguing about
rather than arguing about the world or arguing about
what's important or valuable. Um And then for this
last type of conflict, this sort of raw conflict,
I think that is a type of conflict that
is really important to, you know, take in, in
political theory. And this is an area where I
don't know much, you know, like, I haven't read,
you know, a lot of like Hobbes and Rousseau
and people like that are not, I'm reading a
lot of contemporary epistemology books of the time, right.
But I know that in Hobbs and Rousseau, there
are these questions of, you know, does the world
start with conflict or not? You know, is there
if you go back before political institutions, to what
extent do we have conflict? Maybe, maybe it's just
a state of peer conflict, right? Um, WITHOUT anything
to resolve that conflict, without the politics to resolve
that conflict. And so these peer conflicts in our
sort of modern society where we're always arguing about
politics and giving reasons and things like that, the
peer conflict might start to dissipate in our, in
our thinking. Um But it also may be that
this is sort of like, you know, pretty fundamental
to why we even have politics to begin with.
Um So I think, I think it's important to
keep the possibility of just pure conflict over resources,
you know, pure struggle. Um Me wanting one thing
and you wanting another, it's really important to keep
that in mind. Um uh It's, it's like a
fact of it's an in inimitable fact of human
life
and another very important thing here for us to
try to understand these or, or at least that
people try to explain is where political beliefs come
from, where they stem from. There are different theories
of political beliefs out there and you go, we
list through the main ones in your book. So,
uh I would like to ask you about each
particular one of them to tell us about what
you think are their strengths and limitations. So to
start with the theories based on uh type or
personality we have, for example, moral foundations, a theory
by Frank and he uh theories based on particular
personality traits, like authoritarian is more, for example, people
that do work based on the big five personality
traits, sometimes talk about openness to experience conscientiousness and
other kinds of personality traits. So what do you
make of those types of theories?
Yeah, I think in general, I think there's two
things for me to say one is sort of
like my background intuition just based on my experiences
in the world. And the other is sort of
my evaluation of the ability of these theories. Once
I looked at them sort of academically to explain
political beliefs. So my experience of the world is
really that you have in all different political groups,
you have different types of people. Um AND in
each political group, you have leaders and followers in
each political group, you have moralists and pragmatists and
idealists, you know, ideologies need to be able to
bring in all sorts of people. You have true
believers and grifters, you know, um take, you know,
online, I participate in this sort of like social
justice and antisocial justice, you know, wars, culture, wars,
right? And on, on each side, you have people
who really believe what they're saying. And you also
have people who are you know, trying to sell
something, you know, who are kind of like trying
to make a buck by becoming like an influencer
or something like that. Right? Um So it's my
impression is just that politics always involves at least
in terms of political actors, there's all different types
of people and each group will have, you know,
different types of people in different ways. The, the,
the other thing to say is sort of like
examining these theories, you, you start to have questions
about what the measures of personality are and just
how correlated they are with politics. So for example,
looking at the, the Publications and Moral Foundations Theory,
which has been pretty influential and in my circles
have been pretty influential, right? Because like I said,
at the beginning, my circles are, these are, or
at least where I started out in my public
writing and thinking about these issues, um were sort
of circles with these liberals who were sort of
like, well, the we don't understand conservatives and maybe
if we try to understand conservatives better, um we'll
understand politics better, we'll understand American politics better, we'll
understand why people have reasons for their beliefs. Um
AND we'll be able to improve our own beliefs,
right? That's the dream in a sense, the epistemological
dream, right? Improving our beliefs now. So the idea
of one of the motive, you know, one of
the attractions of moral foundations theory was that it
gave us a, a clean way of saying what
are we not appreciating about conservatives? Right. So we
weren't appreciating that there were, there were these, uh
so just to give an overview of moral foundations
theory, moral foundations theory is, is the idea that
there are these um that there, there's a set
of kind of basic moral principles or ways of
looking at the world or perspectives. Um A set
of five or six of these, uh some of
which are based individualistically and some of which are
not solely about individuals. And the claim of moral
foundations theory is that liberals have liberals see the
world morally in terms of these individualistic foundations, but
not the other ones. Whereas conservatives have both the
individualistic and the sort of group based or purity
based or loyalty based foundations that aren't about individuals
per se. Um You know, individualistic ideas are sort
of like safety care, liberty, um respect dignity, all
things that you could say, I respect a person,
a person should be safe, you know, the human
dignity, things like that. Um And these, these other,
these other values are more about hierarchy and community
and the sanctity of symbols and things like that.
And the idea is that those are the conservative
ones. So the notion was if we liberals start
thinking in terms of these other things, then, you
know, maybe we'll appreciate where conservatives are coming from,
at least, right? But it turns out if you
look at the, you know, if you look at
the actual data in the papers on moral foundations
theory, the sort of correlations of these so called
foundations showing up in the research. It's not like,
you know, it's not a chart that is like
this, this incredibly big line, right? It's actually a
very smooth, you know, is a very smooth and
gentle change from becoming liberal to becoming conservative, right?
Um And it doesn't make it scientifically uninteresting, but
it makes it a little less clear how we
can turn it into a theory of politics. Um
And a political belief, another issue is that all
of these foundations and kind of attached to different
things. And it started to seem to me and
I don't, I don't think I really explained this
in the book as I was going through this
theory, but it started to seem to me that
or, you know, what political group we're a part
of depends much more on what these notions attached
to rather than whether we have these notions at
all. Right? Um So I, you know, one thing,
one thing a lot of people said in say
2017, 2018 when they were reading moral foundations theory,
this notion of purity, um which was supposed to
be a solely conservative notion. A lot of people
said, well, there are left wing notions of, you
know, purity trying to make sure you're not involved
in anything problematic, trying to make sure you don't
use the wrong words, trying to make sure that
you, you don't use the wrong symbols. That seems
like a kind of notion of purity, right? Um
And similarly, like, take the, this so called individualizing
foundation of care. Um Well, there's a question of
who do you care about, right? You're gonna care
more about some people than others. And that seems
like a political question as well. Um So it
seemed to me that it started to seem to
me that most of politics is not in these
foundations but is in sort of like, what are
the, what are the real world dynamics of how
people apply these foundations? Um And how they apply
them selectively. And that is, yes,
go, go ahead. Sorry,
sorry, I was gonna say that is, you know,
moral foundations theory is probably the best of those
theories. A lot of the other theories that are
based on personality um are, are, are much more,
they just start from the perspective that, you know,
he at least started from the Jonathan height, the
sort of the guy behind moral foundation, he at
least started from the perspective of, well, let's try
and understand every, you know, let's try and understand
people and see what we can appreciate about different
views. Um A lot of the personality theories and
really a lot of the psychological theories of political
belief overall, they start from the perspective of, you
know, I know what's right and wrong in politics.
And so I'm gonna, you know, I'm gonna explain
the deviancy of the people who disagree with me
in some time or another. So the idea of
the authoritarian personality is a great example of this
or the idea of the rigidity of the right,
that's a model under which right wingers are just
sort of like cognitively inflexible. Um But you also
see this stuff from centrists where they, they kind
of take these sorts of models and just apply
them to everybody on the extreme. So if you're,
if you're an extremist of some sort, you must,
you know, it's almost a way of saying if
you're an extremist, you have a personality disorder, right?
And that's the explanation for political beliefs. Um OR,
or, you know, correlations with dark triad traits. Um
So the dark triad of uh Machiavellian is and
narcissism and psycho psychopathy um or sociopathy, uh some
studies have suggested there are correlations with that and
political extremism. So I, I think, you know, II
I find flaws in all these things, but I
also have just sort of like this background view
of like this isn't the way we should proceed
in political epistemology. We shouldn't start by, you know,
sort of like hating people we disagree with and
trying to justify it basically, you know, um I
don't, I don't think that's the right way and
it's not, um it's not an approach that is
consistent with the epistemological perspective, which is one which
entertains the possibility of error and doubt and skepticism.
Um And has since Descartes, if not before, you
know,
so another set of theories is based on ideology.
What do you make of them and what do
you think, or how do you look at the
role that ideology might play in political beliefs?
Yeah. So I, I think I ideology is a
really interesting notion. Um And I have certain kinds
of skepticism about uh whether people really have ideologies.
Um So ideological theories try to explain, at least,
at least in the most classical Marxist sense, ideological
theories. I'm probably gonna make some mistakes here. Ideological
theories try to explain why society is stable using
uh posits about the beliefs that people have. So,
you know, if you start from the perspective of
we live in a super unjust society that doesn't
benefit the people in it then or, or most
of the people in it or something like that,
then you have to give an explanation of why
are these, the people in this society? Why are
they not changing things up? Why are they not
having a revolution or why are, why are not,
why are less of them going on strike or
something like that? And you posit ideology uh to
say, well, they've been there, these beliefs have been
sort of put in their heads which tell them
you shouldn't have a revolution, right? It's ok, it
stabilizes the society if they say to themselves, it's
ok that I have less money than the other
person because I don't deserve it. Right. Um, SO
that's ideology in the Marxist sense is when, when
people say, well, I have this background sense of
how things ought to be and that makes it
ok, that society is the way that it is
and that stabilizes society. So that's why a lot
of theories of ideology talk about it as having
a functional role. Um And that also means that
the concept of ideology has an explanatory role when
it comes to uh the stability of society. And
the fact that there aren't revolutions, the fact that
we're still in a capitalist system, um capitalism, they're
not meaning an ideology of capitalism, but just capitalism
as a, you know, certain social structure. Um So
this narrative has been extended past the Marxist. Um
YOU know, one thing that has happened, uh you
know, since the sixties uh in academia is that
different sorts of Marxist theories have been applied to
categories like race and gender. Um And so you
have uh basically theories of ideology explaining, you know,
you know, why, why are, you know, why would
a, a black person accept racial inequality or why
would a woman accept sex inequality? Well, it's because
there's this ideology of white supremacy or this ideology
of patriarchy um which to an extent has been
internalized. So these ideology theories are often theories of
uh the internalization and legitimation and moralization of unjust
um social structures. Um Now, what do I think
of ideology theory? This is a good question. One
thing to say about ideology theories is that this
functional role aspect um is something, is something that
I have some skepticism about. Um I think that
if you, if you look at people's political beliefs
and say, well, this is sort of, this is
sort of coming at them from above. Um FOR
this uh nefarious reason. Um I sort of start
out with a lot of skepticism towards that idea
of how people get their, their beliefs to begin
with, right? Um I tend to think most people
get their beliefs, including their beliefs about politics from
having some sort of contact with reality. Um And
in fact, in the Marxist theory, there's the ideology
theory is sort of combined with the opposite theory,
which is class consciousness, which says yes, from being
in, in the lower class, you do have an
enhanced contact with reality, right? Um You actually have
an epistemic advantage. Um uh THE class disadvantage in,
in Marxism leads in at least some part, you
know, some cir Marxist circles leads to an epistemic
advantage. Um I also don't, so if we think
of an ideology as sort of comprehensive or sort
of big in some way, right? It structures the
way people look at the world, which is one
way people think about ideology. Um, IT'S not clear
to me so it's really easy for somebody like
a philosopher to say, well, of course, people have
all these ideas in their heads and they're trying
to make them consistent and they're making inferences from
them and they're constantly, like, cogitating and intellectualizing everything
they experience. Um, IT'S not clear to me that
most people, you know, that is like a sort
of anxious response, you know, and it's sort of
overthinking that we find maybe intellectually productive use for
in academic philosophy. Um But it, it doesn't seem
to me that I, most people have such structured
ways of thinking about the world. And in fact,
there's classic work by the political science scientist, Philip
Con, um which suggests, yeah, most people don't seem
to have ideologies and I, you know, there's work
by people like Michael Hannon, early femi time, Taiwo
uh about what whether, you know, whether people have
these political beliefs to begin with, uh whether people
really have any political beliefs at all. So I
think, I think I have some skepticism that these,
that these big structures which are really um sort
of intellectual organizations, uh whether they really can play
any causal role when it comes to thinking about
people's individual political beliefs. Um Now, that doesn't mean
the ideology, it could be, it could be that
the notion of ideology still has, you know, can
still be an important notion in political theorizing. Um
But that would be different than saying that individuals
have ideologies, right? Um So for example, here's one
way that here's one way that you could have
an ideology at the level of society without individuals
having an ideology, right? It could be that, you
know, different people have different pieces of the ideology
and for various reasons, you know, the person with
this piece of the ideology gets to say at
this moment and the person with that piece of
the ideology gets to say at that moment. Um
And so that's a way that you could have
without individuals having an ideology, you could still have
some sort of society wide ideology. Um Now, would
it then be best to think of it as
a set of political beliefs? Well, probably not exactly,
it would be better to think of it as
sort of like a, a set of social incentives
and a set of um dynamics in which in
which you had different people are brought forward at
different times or have, have power in different contexts.
Um And this has to do with how conducive
those people's views are to, to some, I don't
know, some power structure or whatever you would want
to call it. Um So you can still have,
maybe the notion of ideology can still be useful
even if you don't think people have ideologies or
individuals have ideologies. Um I also, you know, in
the book, I make this quick note which I've
considered coming back to. Um, SO, and maybe we'll
talk about this later. Uh There's this notion of
conspiracy theory, um, uh, which is a big, uh,
a big topic in political epistemology. Um, JUST because
conspiracy theorizing seems a lot of people to be
very bad, it's bad for society and also seems
to people to be bad reasoning. Um, BUT a
lot of theories of ideology, sort of, kind of
sound like conspiracy theories, right? They sort of sound
like, well, there's this group of people who are
advantaged in society and they sort of put a
lot of ideas in people's heads to pull the
war over their eyes about what's really going on,
right? Um In order to keep their power. Um
And uh yeah, so I have a lot of
skepticism about narratives like that. Um Not because I
think so, I've skepticism about, about that because I
don't think it's so easy to pull the wall
over people's eyes. I do think people want to
pull the wall over each other's eyes, right? Like
people aren't, people aren't so great. Um But I,
but I also don't think people are that gullible
either.
What about group membership? What do you make of
the theories that try to explain political beliefs on
the basis of a group membership?
Yeah. So, yeah, so this is sort of like
the other side of the coin that I was
talking about where, you know, in the Marxist conception,
the relevant groups are classes, right? Um OR economic
strata or different relations to the uh to production
groups with different relations to production. Now, these, these
theories can be very useful uh especially in American
politics, right? A lot of American political commentary is,
you know, well, you know, turns out actually, you
know, there's more, you do a poll and there's
more Hispanic support for Donald Trump this time than
there was last time. So then you're like, wow,
what are, you know, what is this? You know,
why do Hispanics like Trump more? And you have
this whole and uh there do seem to be
correlations where, you know, men vote Republican more often
and women vote Democrat more often, white people vote
Republican more often and black people vote Democrat more
often. So in the US, it seems really useful.
But on the other hand, um these, you know,
these correlations are not actually that strong either, right?
Um So for example, Hispanics, uh these days, it's
around maybe two thirds vote for Democrats and one
third vote for Republicans. Um So to me that's
not gonna be, that doesn't seem like we're gonna
get a great background view of, of where people's
political beliefs come from. Um And in fact, all
these theories, we were just talking about theories of
ideology, they're there precisely to explain why the correlations
aren't that strong, right? The notion is precisely, well,
actually the lower classes, some of them believe in
cal, right? Like some of them don't, some of
them aren't Marxists. We have to explain that. So
we, we, we throw in this notion of ideology,
right? Um So in general, I think that uh
theories of group membership, uh they're just not really
full theories of political belief. Um BECAUSE everybody acknowledges
that, you know, any given member of any demographic
or economic group could support, you know, could support
the, you know, the exact opposite of what everybody
else does, right? And yeah, so there are they
the source of, and I don't know how good
a job I did explaining this in the book.
Um Thinking back now, probably not that great. The
source of in Marxism, the, the source of the
group or the class, political belief has something to
do with the interests of the class, right? So
it's sort of like, you know, the, the proletariat
class interests will determine the proletariat beliefs and the
capitalist class interests will determine the capitalist beliefs in
some sense or another. It's important to distinguish this
from theories of individual interest. Um So that's another
kind of mysterious question of how do I sort
of conceive of myself as a member of a
class or group rather than an individual and sort
of magically get the class interest into my head.
There's obvious reasons why, you know, we have a
sense of our own individual interest because we have
a sense of our desires, right? Um It's not
clear, this is another instance, the notion of class
interest seems very intellectual and abstract. It's not clear
to me that most humans are gonna are gonna
be thinking about politics in this way, um whether
explicitly or implicitly.
So another set of theories has to do with
social isolation. So what are the claims there?
Yeah. So these are, these are the that um
fit really well with contemporary American politics and of
course, with all these things, there's a difficulty of,
you know, this book is a very American book,
right? I'm, I'm writing about dynamics that seem to
be present in American politics right now, right? Um
So the, these, these theories about social groups uh
are they're different from the group membership theories um
because they have to do with the incentives people
have uh to sort of not avoid going against
their group, right? Um So these incentives could be
kind of internal or external, right? Um So the
external incentive is like, if I'm a democrat and
I say taxes should be lower and everybody should
own a gun, then maybe my friends aren't friends
with me anymore, right? Maybe I get socially um
ostracized or something like that. The internal one is
like, and this is the one that is really,
really keyed to this current moment in American politics.
The internal one is about maybe my sense of
myself is tied up in a certain way with
being a good Democrat or being a good Republican
or being a good progressive or being a good
conservative or whatever it is. And that means if
I go against the group on a political issue
internally, I feel a struggle internally. I start saying
who am I, I start worrying that I can't
make sense of my own identity, right? Um And
so you have these two sources of pressure from
the notion of political identity. And so, yeah, the
theory basically says our political beliefs exist in part
or we have the political beliefs we do in
part reserve the external and internal appearance of having
some kind of identity that corresponds with the political
group. Um And yeah, so this is, it's very,
it's still a notion that it's based on the
fact that there are political groups. Um But the
groups in question are different uh than in, than
in the group membership. The, and uh the relationship
is also different. Um uh It's much more a
relationship based on psychological incentives and things like that.
Um And one thing to say about these identity
and partisanship type theories is that they're not theories
on which our political beliefs come out looking very
rational. Um These are theories on which, you know,
we're doing motivated reasoning to avoid upsetting our sense,
upsetting our social circle or upsetting our sense of
who we are, you know. Um And uh that's
not, you know, that's not epistemological, secure right. That's
not looking at the evidence and making a recent
judgment. Um It's sort of uh you know, reacting
on instinct, um reacting out of a sense of
threat or something like that, a social or psychological
threat. So let me ask you about one final
set of theories before we move on to another
topic, you also cover theories based on cognitive heuristics.
So what are these about?
Yeah. So this is, this is um this is
really just one theory from the late Jeffrey Friedman,
who was a, I wouldn't say a mentor but
invited me to a thing at Berkeley. And we
had a lot of talks about political epistemology when
I was just starting out in grad school. Um
So he has basically a theory. Uh IT takes
as its starting point, sort of like the complexity
of the modern world. Um And Friedman Friedman's notion
is that we have to do something to cognitively
to simplify the modern world. We have to be
able to understand the modern world in some way.
And I don't, I forget if he uses the
term cognitive heuristics, it might be the term I
use. Basically, the notion is we need a way
to categorize all the different inputs we're we're getting
um maybe we need some information is more important
than others, or some people can be trusted and
other people can't um or some phenomena we reach
for certain sorts of explanations, right? Rather than others
because if we couldn't do that, then, you know,
you try to make you just, just think of
how many things are happening in the world. And
if you're on, you're on Twitter like me, I
think how, just how many world events you see,
you, you're, you, you're familiar with the internal politics
of all these different countries. You know, whenever I
wake up early I see all these tweets from
my British friends about all, all everything that's happening
in British politics. Um And then the Americans wake
up and I hear about American politics and then,
you know, there's Asian politics and it's sort of
like, you know, if I want to make sense
of this. Um AND avoid it being uh you
know, Friedman is working from sort of American pragmatist
tradition. I think it's William James who he, he
quotes. That's maybe, maybe someone else. But there's this
phrase uh about the uh I think about babies
where before they have categories for their experience, they
experience the world as a blooming buzzing confusion. Um
IS the phrase, right? So the idea is if
we don't want the world to just be like
a confusing assortment of signs and symbols, um we
need boxes to put the things in. Um And
Friedman basically said that there's no rational way to
pick one kind of categorization or over another one
set of heuristics over another. Um Because you're sort
of pre rational the, the, the way you organize
your information is prior to the rationality of, of,
of digesting it um and making inferences based on
it. Um And so he basically thinks all of
your politics will be determined by the set of
cognitive heuristics that you're working with to simplify uh
the informational sphere. Um So an example that he,
I think, and his life sort of went back
and forth on maybe in some sense, uh is
the notion that people respond to incentives, which obviously
is an assumption that economists make and political libertarians
and other sorts of, you know, economic determinist and
materialists, um uh and reduction, you know, economic reductionist
make, class reductionist and Marxism make um the notion
that people are gonna respond to incentives uh also
helps us explain a lot of different things. Um
Yeah, but according to Friedman, it's one of these,
like, you, you can't really get behind it, right?
It's not something that you can assess. It's just
sort of like a way of um a way
of making sense of the world. Um AAA kind
of heuristic or, or, or, or even a kind
of bias. Um So that's, so that's Friedman's notion.
It's, it's an interesting notion. I, I don't, I
don't know if to me that there's, it seems
a little um I don't know if I really
believe in the hierarchy of there are these different
kinds of things by one of which is a
heuristic and then there's the perception and the heuristic
and they're like completely different types of, you know,
maybe he doesn't need to make such a strong
assumption. Um But to me, it's always seemed that
we can, we can re evaluate our heuristics. Um
If they, if they, you know, if they lead
us astray, um, it can be very difficult obviously
and we can get stuck in them, especially as
we get older, less flexible. Um, BUT I'm not,
I'm, I don't think we get stuck in quite
the way. Um I call it tunneling. It's like
tunnel vision you get right when you have these
year, I don't think, I don't think it's necessary
that we get tunnel vision in this way. Um
I think a lot of people do um but
that's sort of out of, you know, the explanation
for that is not gonna be from like first
principle. So he thinks this is like a first
principle. It's just the way perception and complexity work
that we have to have these simplifications. I think
it's more about like people are a little lazy
and stuff like
that. So uh let me ask you now about
the epistemology of democracy, which is also something that
you cover in the book. So what is this
about? Exactly? I mean, what are the kinds of
questions that people raise when they talk about the
epistemology of democracy? And since we're talking about epistemology
here, should we trust what the majority beliefs?
Yeah. Good question. Um So the notion of the
epistemology of democracy, yes, basically this question that, that,
that you just asked, uh should we trust the
majority um in the la sorry. In the late
17 hundreds, um people started being interested in sort
of a, you know, statistical and mathematical justifications for
democracy. Um And one of them uh from the
Marquis de Conor site, very, very simple notion is
just about uh how majority votes go if the
voters are sort of independent. Um And it turns
out that, uh you know, the more people you
have voting, as long as they're reliable and reliable,
you know, to a very small degree, just like
better than chance, right, better than a coin flip
to the extent that people are better than a
coin flip as you add, people who are in
some sense are correlated with one another. Um You
actually get a completely reliable um majority vote um
if the number of voters is high enough. Um
So this is like a ma uh a mathematical
fact. Um And so the epistemology of democracy um
or democratic epistemology is sort of a research program
where people debate. What did these, what does this
mathematical fact have to do with real world democracy?
Um IN a sense. Well, this is, this is
one side of the epistemology of democracy, the other
sense that that's what I call aggregate, right? Where
you're aggregating, aggregating a lot of different people um
the other side of the epistemology of democracy uh
is about deliberation and the notion that, yeah, if
you have a group of people talking something over,
just think about when you go to, you know,
when you have a hard decision, you ask other
people for advice, right? Um It just seems that
if we deliberate in a group, we get more
reasons, we have more minds, right? We have more
people helping to figure something out. Um It seems
like bringing in other people, other smart people always
helps us make decisions. That's what we do. Um
Very, very common practice for people to ask and
advice in this way. And so you have these
two sides, the aggregation and the deliberation. Um And
in political theory, you would be using these to
say, well, this is why democracy is good, right?
Um That's not exactly my goal is the epistemological
goal of the individual, which is sort of like,
say, I say, I know that a group of
people deliberated and came to a certain conclusion. Uh
Should I trust that conclusion or like under what
conditions should I trust that conclusion or say, I
see that there's a majority vote under what conditions
should I trust that majority vote? And so just
taking these one by one in the deliberating case,
one thing we might want to say is, well,
it depends on the internal dynamics of the deliberating
group, right? So if there are sort of, you
know, uh, I think Helen Land more or somebody
calls it reputational influences. Right. Um, IF there are,
or maybe it's what K Sunstein calls it, if
there are these reputational influences where there, there's one
person in there who everybody likes, you know, um,
or maybe he's, like, really physically attractive or something
and nobody wants to, you know, nobody wants to
disagree with them. Right. So, they're just gonna say
what they want and everybody's just gonna go along
with them. That's not a group, I'm gonna trust,
right? Unless I trust that one person, everybody's going
along with the one person I trust. But then
it's basically just the equivalent of only trusting one
person, right? Did everybody feel free to speak things
like that? That'll affect whether I trust, whether I
trust the group. What are the, basically what are
the incentives for giving good reasons or giving bad
reasons? Um In the aggregate case, I, you wanna
know sort of like how good, how good are
the people who I'm aggregating and making decisions, their
competency. And if, if it turns out that most
people who are voting get things wrong most of
the time, then you're not gonna trust the vote,
right? But if it turns out that most people,
most of the people voting get things right? Most
of the time, then you are gonna trust the
vote, the other issue which is very dear to
my heart. Um Probably to me, one of the
most important things in the book, one of the
most important notions of the book is this notion
that if people are making up their minds independently,
the group, the majority vote of the group will
be, will be more reliable. Um And this, yeah,
this is just what Connor says, jury theorem says
um and can be seen uh you know, mathematically.
So in, in the book, I have two diagrams,
you know, of if you have three people and
three issues and each, each person is right about
two out of the three issues and wrong about
one, well, if they're wrong all wrong about the
same issue, then the majority vote will get that
wrong, right? But if they're all wrong about different
issues, then the majority vote will get every issue.
Right. Right. Um So it's a way of, you
know, if, if you think about it's almost like
investments, it's a way of like diversifying risk or
something like that, right? Like it's a way of,
it's a way of unc correlating the risk making
sure that mistakes don't happen at the same time
if people are thinking independently. Um NOW there's a
sort of paradox here which is like this is
a reason to trust majority votes or to trust
deliberation. But in trusting these democratic mechanisms, I reduce
the independence of my own decision making, right? By
looking to them as a source for my beliefs.
And that makes me actually worse at contributing to
them. Right? So there's a sense in which they
are epistemic responsibility in terms of our own beliefs
may not be the same as our epistemic responsibility
and some broader sense of contributing to a group
if that makes sense. Um I don't know if
that does make sense.
Y yes, it does. And, but then an alternative
to the epistemology of democracy would be to trust
the experts. Uh What do you make of that?
Yeah,
I think that so in the, in the book,
I, I lay out, I think seven different questions
about the nature of expertise. Um But the, you
know, the main question is uh you know, like,
how well are the experts doing right now? Um
Well, so there, there's two main questions for, for
a novice, right? One is how well are the
experts doing right now? And the other is, can
I even, can I even figure out who the
experts are? Right? Um So the second question, can
I even figure out who the experts are? This
is called the no novice expert question um or
the no sex problem by Alan Goldman uh has
a classic paper experts. Which ones can you trust
um about this problem? So the question is basically
like, you know, s you know, there's some mathematicians
disagreeing about a proof um two of them and
I'm trying to decide which one of them is,
right? One of them thinks is valid. The other
one thinks is in God. And so then I
look at all, you know, how do I decide
who's the math expert? Well, I can look at
all the other opinions about math. Mhm. Why? I
don't know if they read about those either. Right.
Because I'm not the math expert. So there's a
sense in which to evaluate which one of them
is a math expert. I have to be a
math expert, right to even know who the expert
is, especially in a case where experts are disagreeing.
Um And I think this is important in political
questions because in political questions, as we said, we're
always in this situation of dispute or conflict, right?
And one thing you see very commonly uh especially
in American politics, people will say, well, they have
their experts and we have ours, right? You have
think tanks, for example, you have right wing and
left wing think tanks which come up with the
published research, I maybe even peer reviewed articles and
the different experts think different things. Um So it's,
you know, it can be very difficult if you
have just one large literature on one side, one
large literature, on the other side. If you're not
going to take the time to be an expert
yourself, it's actually very difficult to choose a lot
of the time. Um And this is, you know,
again, this is gonna be very difficult to get
out of political epistemology because politics involves conflict um
and involves dispute. So they are gonna be experts
disputing these things most of the time. Now, the
question of how all the experts are doing, I
talked before about, you know, the these questions from
a little under a decade ago, about uh the
state of academic research, the state of social science,
the state of psychological research. Um uh FOR me,
one of the lessons of the replication crisis of
social psychology and also just one of the lessons
from my own experience in academia, you know, getting
to know some experts seeing what's, what's put into
different fields. Um And it's not so much, you
know, expert knowledge is always changing, it's always in
flux. Um Some of that is improvement, some of
it is fashion. But I, I think my sense
is that an ordinary person um if they see
some press release, so say, let's get, let's take
a, a practical situation, right? An ordinary person sees
some press release uh that says, you know, a
scientist at our, you know, at our university. Uh
THEY, they prove this in their lab. Um And
this is gonna be so amazing and it's gonna
have these great results. So just my experience, first
of all, did they actually prove it or not?
Who knows if it'll replicate, who knows if the
statistics were, were satisfying? Who knows if there's another
scientist on the other side of the issue who
has another paper saying the opposite. Right. Second question
is, is the, is the finding even being reported
accurately. Sometimes you talk to a scientist and they
say, oh, it's so embarrassing. The university wanted to
hype me up. And so they pretended I'd made
this big claim, but really, I'm making this very
small academic point, you know, so there's also a
question of, uh you know, as a reader can,
I even can I even really completely understand what's
being claimed um in this scientific paper. Um So
there's all, there's all these sorts of problems and
you start to, you know, then you know, another,
another question is which, which, which research gets in,
you know, it becomes known to you as a
normal person to begin with. Um Is it gonna
be the sort of depoliticized day to day, highly
reliable workmanlike research of a scientist? No, it's probably
gonna be the sort of research, the sort of
thing that would make waves, especially in the angry
Clickbait era. The sort of research that is gonna
make its way to your consciousness as a normal
person probably is going to be research that is
political, that is likely to be in dispute, that
is likely to be controversial in some way and
that people will think is relevant to political questions.
So it's not, you know, it's not clear to
me that, you know, the evidentiary value of the
missives that a normal person gets from above from
the experts is gonna be very high to begin
with, right? Because we don't know where they came
from. We don't know what the state of the
debate behind them is. We don't know exactly how
to make sense of them and the incentives that
lead them uh to make their way to us
are probably not great. So my, my general view
is that, um and this is all apart from
the question of whether we can even make notion
of the sense of we make sense of the
notion of a political expert, right? Um And whether
there are moral experts and things like that. So
my sense is that it's, it's very difficult um
Even if one wanted to trust the experts, it's
difficult to find them. Um And it's difficult to
interpret uh their sort of signs and symbols.
So in the book, you also go through some
political issues that people worry about like polarization, conspiracy
theories, fake news. Uh Let's talk perhaps about conspiracy
theories. You alluded to that earlier in our conversation.
So, um what would you have to say from
an epistemological standpoint about conspiracy theories?
Yeah. So I think conspiracy theories um are difficult
for epistemology. It, it seems to, I think to
a lot of epistemology, it seems like there must
be something wrong with, with conspiracy theories. Um But
it can be very hard to characterize exactly what
and in fact, it can be a little difficult
to even characterize what a conspiracy theory is. So
for example, uh in Ancient Rome, there is a
conspiracy that resulted in Julius Caesar being killed, right?
Believing that doesn't seem to make me a conspiracy
theorist. Um Even though I believe in the conspiracy,
maybe because it's become established fact or maybe because
it's so long ago or something like that, then
you also have these non-political conspiracies. So when I
taught a class, what were they? Um THERE'S a
famous rapper from the 19 nineties, Tupac. So one
of the conspiracy theories somebody came up with was
that Tupac was still alive. Um So that was
their notion of a conspiracy theory is that, you
know, is that a conspiracy? Well, I guess it
depends on how many people know and how, you
know, how they, they were involved with him. So
I think it, it can be a little bit
hard to get a handle on exactly which phenomenon
we're talking about. When we talk about conspiracy theories,
there is something that obviously seem like they're just
like core instances of the phenomenon of conspiracy theories.
And I do think that sometimes, you know, there's
basically two approaches when you have trouble defining something
you can say, well, let's work through all the
examples and counter examples unless you know, we really
have to make sure should this be in, should
this not be in, in other words to just
say, well, let's just talk about there are some
things that are obviously like core instances, the phenomenon,
let's just talk about them, right? So that's something
we could have done when we were worrying about
the definition of politics, we could have said. Well,
let's just think about the things everybody that must
be politics, you know, going to war, you know,
signing a bill that says we're going to go
to war, right? When the Republican and Democrats disagree
about it or something like that. So with conspiracy
theories, you know, the core ones, so take in
America, the Qanon theory, um this is, you know,
ok, I'm forgetting what it is. I think it
involves a guy called, you call himself Q who
claims to have some sort of inside source on
government information, maybe claims to be a government agent
himself who makes these online posts that says that,
you know, here's what's going on within the government,
here's what the information drop is gonna be about.
You know, the abuses people are doing or Hillary
Clinton is doing that or Bill Clinton is doing
this. Um And uh you know, a lot of
people are covering it up, you know, a lot
of the government is implicated or a lot of
the powerful people are implicated and they're doing this
for their own advantage. I mean, sometimes for a
very nefarious kind of advantage, right? Maybe, maybe to
abuse Children or something. So that obviously seems like
a conspiracy theory that posits a conspiracy, the conspiracy
goes against um the, the official story of the
US government and of US power. Um It's uh
you know, a lot of people are, are acting
badly, right. They're, they're doing it for nefarious or
evil purposes. Um They're doing it secretly, they're doing
it through secret mechanisms, things like that. So that
seems like a clear case of conspiracy theory. Um
On the other hand, if we look at those
aspects, it's hard to say which of those renders
the belief irrational. Because certainly believing that people act
in evil ways for their own interests is not
by itself irrational. Believing that people act in secret
is not by itself irrational. Believing that powerful people
can act in concert with each other, can coordinate
their actions that's not irrational. Um And believing that
sometimes your government is wrong, that doesn't seem irrational
either, right? Uh So once we come up with
it, even in the core case, once we say
these are the things that seem to have contributed
to it being a conspiracy theory, it's hard to
say which of these is really the problem. Uh
WHERE, where did these people really go wrong? Um
No, of course. So that's the problem with generalism,
right? Generalism is sort of like we try to
identify the aspects of the conspiracy theory and we
say one of this just is irrational. Now, particular
is, is the approach where you look at a
specific conspiracy theory and you say, well, they just
don't have very good evidence for this. No, of
course, that's probably true. In a lot of the
case, obviously in Qanon, it's true in the case
of Qanon is true. But that's something where you
can just say, well, there's this guy saying some
stuff is gonna happen and mostly it doesn't happen.
You only have one source, uh, everybody else, you
know, disagrees with the guy. So you sort of
have, you know, in general, you know, if 100
people say one thing and one person said another
thing in general, you go with 100 people, right?
Um So in the case of qanon, you know,
there's gonna be specific things where you can look
at here are the dynamics of the theory. Here
are the dynamics of how people are acquainted with
the theory. And those dynamics don't suffice to make
a belief in irrational. Um But those dynamics will
be different from one theory to another, right? They'll
be different for different conspiracy theories, things that interest
me. Um And this sort of came up with
the, the notion of ideology. Uh There's this way
of people, people will take kind of conspiratorial beliefs
and make them, they'll remove this sort of individual
agents from them and just say, well, the conspiracy
is sort of like internalized or in people's heads
somehow. Um Nobody is intentionally doing this, it just
sort of emerges um out of the structure of
society, the conspiracy emerges out of the structure of
society. Um THAT I've never really understood why that's
any different than a normal, I mean, individual agency,
people always act with individual, you know, whether they
act with individual agency or don't, you know, like
that doesn't seem like something that licenses or, or,
or changes the rationality of, of a conspiracy theory
to me. Um So there's two types of explanation.
It doesn't seem to me that one of them
is gonna be, you know, if one of them
is super irrational, the other one probably will be
too. So basically, and I think this is the
philosophical consensus right now. Um Basically, we have to
look at conspiracy theories on their merits. Um Often
they don't have, you know, often they're not meritorious
belief, um rationally, not epidemically meritorious. Um But it's
gonna be hard to say something very general about
what's wrong with conspiracy theorizing.
So let me ask you ju uh about just
one last topic. So, uh because there are people
that make claims about how the history of a
particular society might also influence people's political beliefs. So
does that happen? I mean, does the history of
our society that society have any bearing on our
political beliefs?
Yeah, absolutely. Um Yeah. So I think in the
most general sense, um the way our societies develop
are going, you know, are going to affect social
circumstances. Um AND they're going to affect kind of
traditions, as well as intellectual traditions, there's gonna be
received wisdom and things like that. Um One thing
I found interesting in writing this book was the
sort of different uh views. Once I recognized the
tradition was part of political epistemology. Um It struck
me that, you know, different political groups are characterized
in part by different attitudes towards tradition. Um So
obviously, conservatives are usually bigger fans of tradition and
progressives, not so much, right? Um In a way
it's in the name, right? So progressives think we
make progress and conservatives want to keep what we've
already got, right? Um uh And neither, you know,
without saying more, neither of those seem bad, right?
What, what if we could make progress while also
keeping the good things we already have, that would
be insanely good, right? Um That would make for
a really great society. Um But so there's a
few different ways of looking at. So from the
progressive side, there's this fact that I think to
a lot of people at least seems difficult to,
to dispute this fact of moral progress. So the
fact that for almost all of human history, um
there wasn't, it wasn't taken as obvious that you
shouldn't own slaves. Um Of course, in America, we
had a chattel slavery which was racialized, um a
war which was just, you know, based on race
or whatever the right word is. Um But, you
know, even in other, you know, there were Aristotle
root in favor of slavery um or defended slavery.
Uh You had, you had slavery. And basically, you
know, my understanding is most civilizations um for most
of human history. Um So we've made progress by
recognizing that slavery in some sense is just an
extreme affront to morality and dignity and things like
that. Um And so the progressive view might be,
well as time goes on, we'll keep having, you
know, we'll keep figuring out what's right and wrong,
you know, we'll keep making progress with that, we'll
keep figuring it out. Um And uh on the
other side, you have some arguments about uh why
we shouldn't change things so much. Now, 11 argument.
So GK Chesterton has a couple arguments, you know,
he's a great British traditionalist, um or conservative or
whatever the right word is uh defender of tradition.
One argument is the, the idea of the democracy
of the dead, basically. Like, you know, if you
believe in democracy and believe that adding people makes
things better. Why not, why not include the perspectives
of people who have, who have already come before
us, right? Um And another is this idea of
Chesterton's fence. So he says, you know, before you
destroy something in society, you have to make sure
you understand why it's there, right? Um The people
who built it know why they built it. And
if you don't know why it's there, that means
that they have the advantage over you, right? That
means you should trust them because they're an expert
on experts on why it was built then in
a slightly different way. Friedrich Hayek uh has the
same view. I mean, Hayek believes that nobody, even
the people who built it probably don't understand why
it was there. Um So Hayek has a more
sort of invisible hand evolutionary type approach where he
says, you know, just as no one person can
understand why an item is priced the way it
is. No one person can understand why a social
structure is what it is and what functions it
might start. So, just like, um you know, just
like the theories of ideology, he talks about the
functional role that things play in society. Um But
he thinks that those functions can be very obscure
to us. Um And so in terms of resolving,
you know, resolving these disputes about political epistemology between
um progressives and traditionalists. Well, I, I don't think
it's, you know, I, I don't think it's something
um that, that has a final resolution um necessarily,
or at least not one that I've found. But
I have, you know, I did start to wonder
about this notion of moral progress a little bit
as I was writing and I started to wonder
why, you know, OK, so I know obviously we're
doing better now from my perspective than we were
back when people didn't realize how bad slavery was,
right. We've made progress in figuring out the slavery
is bad. And then maybe in 100 years there
will be another change where people say this thing
is good or this thing is bad and they'll
disagree with me. One thing I didn't quite understand
when I was thinking about moral progress is why,
you know, what is it about 100 years passing?
That should make me think they're right and I'm
wrong. Why shouldn't I say? Well, I'm the high
point, I'm right about everything people in the past
were wrong about slavery, then it'll change again and
people in the future will be wrong about this
other thing, but I can stick with my own
beliefs, right? Um And so I was trying to
figure out why that was one is just maybe
you just infer from the fact that progress has
been made so far. Um The notion that it
will continue to be made, um That seems like
a strong, you know, that seems like an unlikely
inference. Yeah. So I, I'm still thinking about this
question of moral progress. Um A lot. Uh And
there's, you know, there's different areas, uh there's different
areas of political life where, where, where the notion
of moral progress is relevant. II, I really think
it's um it's an under discussed notion, uh the
notion of progress. Uh There's questions of whether morality
really works like science, what, what assumptions do you
need to make about morality and politics? To even
think that there's an analogy um between moral or
political progress and scientific progress. Um Probably some pretty
robust assumptions. Uh So that I'm glad you asked
about that. That is, you know, so the connection
between political epistemology and history probably of everything in
the book. Um It is the thing that has
been that that's like completely new. Um I, I
don't think anybody has discussed that before. Um So
I'm excited to see what people think of it
at least. But uh yes, I appreciate you asking
about it. Great. So the book is again, political
beliefs of philosophical introduction. And I'm leaving a link
to it in the description of the interview and
Oliver just before we go apart from the book,
would you like to tell people where they can
find you when your work on the internet?
Yeah. So I keep a site on Weebly uh
Oliver tral.weebly.com. You can find, I do a lot
of public writing so you can find my book
reviews and, and cultural essays and things like that
there. Um I have a Twitter account but usually,
you know, I'm not very good at Twitter so
um people can find me there if they like.
Um uh And yeah, um I appreciate you having
me on.
No, of course. I really love the book. So
thank you so much for taking the time to
come on the show. It's been fun to talk
with you. Yeah. Thank you. Hi guys. Thank you
for watching this interview. Until the end. If you
liked it, please share it. Leave a like and
hit the subscription button. The show is brought to
you by N Lights learning and development. Then differently
check the website at N lights.com and also please
consider supporting the show on Patreon or paypal. I
would also like to give a huge thank you
to my main patrons and paypal supporters, Perego Larson,
Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno Bernard Seche O of
Alex Adam Castle Matthew Whitting Bear. No wolf, Tim
Ho Erica LJ Connors, Philip Forrest Connelly. Then the
Met Robert Wine in NAI Z Mar Nevs calling
in Hobel Governor Mikel Stormer Samuel Andre Francis for
Agns Ferger Ken Hall, her ma J and Lain
Jung Y and the Samuel K Hes Mark Smith
J. Tom Hummel s friends, David Sloan Wilson, Yaar
Roman. Roach Diego, Jan Punter, Romani Charlotte, Bli Nicole
Barba, Adam Hunt, Pavlo, Stassi, Nale Me, Gary G
Alman, Samo, Zal Ari and YPJ Barboza Julian Price
Edward Hall, Eden Broner Douglas Fry Franka La Gilon
Cortez or Scott Zachary ftdw Daniel Friedman, William Buckner,
Paul Giorgio, Luke Loki, Georgio Theophano, Chris Williams and
Peter Wo David Williams, the Ausa Anton Erickson, Charles
Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore Larry
Dey Junior, Old Ebon Starry Michael Bailey. Then Spur
by Robert Grassy Zorn, Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas
Radick Mark Temple, Thomas Dvor Luke Neeson, Chris Tory
Kimberley Johnson. Benjamin Gilbert Jessica week in the B
brand Nicholas Carlson Ismael Bensley Man, George Katis, Valentine
Steinman, Perros, Kate Van Goler, Alexander, Abert Liam Dan
Biar Masoud Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular J Ner Urla. Good
enough, Gregory Hastings David Pins of Shan Nelson, Mike
Levin and Jos Net. A special thanks to my
producers is our web, Jim Frank Luca Toni, Tom
Ween, Bernard N Cortes Dixon Bendik Muller Thomas Trumble,
Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carl, Negro, Nick Ortiz
and Nick Golden. And to my executive producers, Matthew
Lavender, Si Adrian Bogdan Knits and Rosie. Thank you
for all.